
# Introduction
---------------------------
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As the data engineer, I have been tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. I was able to test my database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.

To do this, I applied what I've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, I had to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.


# Project Datasets
--------------------------------

There are two datasets that reside in S3. The links for each are:
* Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
* Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
* song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

* {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
* log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

# Schema for Song Play Analysis
----------------------------------------------------

Created a Star Scema which included the following tables:

Fact Table:
- **Songplays**
    - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page **NextSong**
        - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
        
Dimension Tables:
- **users** 
    - users in music database  
        - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
- **songs** 
    - songs in music database 
        - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- **artists** 
    - artists in music database 
        - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
- **time** 
    - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units 
        - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


# Project Steps
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Create Table Schemas

1. Design schemas for your fact and dimension tables
1. Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
1. Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
1. Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
1. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
1. Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
1. Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.

### Build ETL Pipeline

1. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
1. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
1. Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.
1. Delete your redshift cluster when finished.

