
# Introduction
---------------------------
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As the data engineer, I have been tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. I was able to test my database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.

To do this, I applied what I've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, I had to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.


# Project Datasets
--------------------------------

There are two datasets that reside in S3. The links for each are:
* Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
* Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
* song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

* {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
* log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

# Schema for Song Play Analysis
----------------------------------------------------

Created a Star Scema which included the following tables:

Fact Table:
- **Songplays**
    - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page **NextSong**
        - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
        
Dimension Tables:
- **users** 
    - users in music database  
        - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
- **songs** 
    - songs in music database 
        - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- **artists** 
    - artists in music database 
        - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
- **time** 
    - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units 
        - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


# ETL pipeline
---------------------------------------------------------------
1. Load credentials
1. Read data from S3
    * Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
    * Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
    
The script reads song_data and load_data from S3.

1. Process data using spark 
* Transforms them to create five different tables listed under Dimension Tables and Fact Table. Each table includes the right columns and data types. Duplicates are addressed where appropriate.

1. Load it back to S3
* Writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3.
* Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month.